Document UnusedStoreEliminator (#13501)
ethereum/solidity: docs/internals/optimizer.rst

This optimization stage removes unreachable code.

Unreachable code is any code within a block which is preceded by a

> leave, return, invalid, break, continue, selfdestruct or revert (whether it be an explicit ``revert()``, or caused by infinite recursion).

Reviewer: I'd actually not try to overload ``revert`` here. There's several builtin functions in the list already, so it's weird not to have this revert also refer to the builtin.

I'd just make it

```suggestion
leave, return, invalid, break, continue, selfdestruct or revert or by a call to a user-defined function that infinitely recurses.
```
or something like that

Reviewer: Also note that ``invalid()`` earlier in the list also is a case of a revert (we may also want to add that to the UnusedStoreEliminator docs)

Author: That's why I was more for the option of just using revert as a blanket statement, instead of mentioning specific reasons that a revert may occur. Aside from `invalid()` (which is explicit I guess?), is there anything else that may cause a revert?

Reviewer: You can reverse the point, though - since here you have an explicit list of statements and builtins causing reverts, "revert" specifically *doesn't* cover ``invalid`` nor infinite recursion. If ``revert`` was meant to cover it, ``invalid`` wouldn't be in the list.
But no, there's no other cases. Well, theoretically, infinite loops, but the optimizer doesn't handle them specially.

Author: Yes, I understand the point, and I do somewhat agree with it, but my understanding is that we have a blanket concept of a revert, which may be caused by explicit calls, such as `revert()` and `invalid()`, and by ones generated implicitly through an optimizer step, such as the infinite recursion case. The unfortunate thing here I guess, is the fact that a `revert()` is a subset of revert, so a `revert()` is a revert, but a revert isn't a `revert()` only :D 
And I guess it's a little late to introduce a term like rollback.

This optimization stage removes unreachable code.

Unreachable code is any code within a block which is preceded by a

> leave, return, invalid, break, continue, selfdestruct, revert or by a call to a user-defined function that infinitely recurses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
leave, return, invalid, break, continue, selfdestruct, revert or by a call to a user-defined function that recurses infinitely.
```
I may have suggested this in the first place, but the other way round is more idiomatic, isn't it? Not too important in any case (in the end it's a rather silly special case and technicality anyways).

Author: If it's a special case, I suggest even more special wording - `ad infinitum`.
Jokes aside, yeah, your suggestion does sound better.

``function f(x) -> y { revert(y, y} }`` where the literal ``y`` will be replaced by its value ``0``,
allowing us to rewrite the function.

.. _unused-store-eliminator:

UnusedStoreEliminator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Optimizer component that removes ``sstore`` and ``mstore`` statements if conditions are met for said removal.
In case of ``sstore``, if all code paths lead to a revert, or if a previous ``sstore`` is overwritten,

> the statement will be removed. For example, the following code

Reviewer: Maybe rather something like
```suggestion
In case of an ``sstore``, if all outgoing code paths lead to a revert or to another ``sstore`` for which the optimizer can tell that it will overwrite the first store, the statement will be removed. For example, the following code
```
?
Not sure I'm following the "or if a previous ``sstore`` is overwritten" bit.

Author: Maybe it's because I wrote it, but it makes sense to me, especially with the example straight after it. I find your suggestion equally understandable, so am not against changing it.

.. code-block:: yul

    {
        let c := calldataload(0)
        sstore(c, 1)
        if c {
            sstore(c, 2)
        }
        sstore(c, 3)
    }

will produce the code below after the unused store eliminator step is run

.. code-block:: yul

    {
        {
            let c := calldataload(0)
            let _2 := 1
            if c { let _3 := 2 }
            sstore(c, 3)
        }
    }

For ``mstore``, things are generally simpler, as all ``mstore`` statements will be removed if they are never

> read from in all code paths.

Reviewer: Yeah, but that's only half of the truth... that's true for ``mstore``s in the main outermost yul block - if you're analyzing a function body on the other hand, it works more like the storage case: then you don't know if the memory may be read, *after* returning from the function, so anything that's not overwritten in the function itself, will be retained.

Also it's not just ``mstore``s, but any memory-writing operation like ``calldatacopy`` as well for example (in which case you have to deal with arbitrary ranges in memory, for which "overwriting" or "not reading from" is actually rather hard to determine in general, but we don't have to get into that part in the docs anyways).

``function f(x) -> y { revert(y, y} }`` where the literal ``y`` will be replaced by its value ``0``,
allowing us to rewrite the function.

.. _unused-store-eliminator:

> UnusedStoreEliminator

Reviewer 2: I'd add an index entry for it. We should really have index entries for all of them but I guess that's out of scope of this PR.

Author: How and where do I do that?

Reviewer 2: Check on other pages how the `index` directive is used. It's often next to headers.

Also see the "Keyword Index" section in the docs menu to see how the index looks like.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Optimizer component that removes ``sstore`` and ``mstore`` statements if conditions are met for said removal.

Reviewer 2: For memory it's not just `mstore`. There are many opcodes that read and write memory: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/8df45f5f8632da4817bc7ceb81497518f298d290/libevmasm/SemanticInformation.cpp#L359-L392

Author: Should all of these be mentioned explicitly, or just use something like 'memory store' instead of `mstore`?

Reviewer 2: Probably the latter. We don't want to have to update the list. It just should not say only `mstore`.

> In case of an ``sstore``, if all outgoing code paths lead to a revert or to another ``sstore`` for which the optimizer

Reviewer 2: We might want to point out that it does not necessarily have to be an explicit `revert()`. Infinite recursion is also treated as a revert (because it will eventually lead to out of gas).

Author: This isn't mentioning an explicit `revert()` though, it's just saying revert, whatever the cause of said revert may be is kind of irrelevant here, no?

Reviewer 2: I know, but it could be taken that way. I think it's not obvious that the optimizer would actually detect infinite recursion and treat it as a revert so I think it's worth mentioning.

Author: I disagree with this, as I think we'd have to go through the entire optimizer doc and mention infinite recursion detection and the subsequent `revert` due to it in every instance; I feel as though it's too much detail for something that should give a broad explanation of an optimizer step. @ekpyron @chriseth, any of you want to be the tie breaker?

Reviewer: I mean, it doesn't say ``revert``, but revert :-D...
But yeah, if we want to go with @nikola-matic's argumentation I'd rather say ``if all outgoing code paths revert`` not ``lead to a revert``. 

But yeah, it then doesn't hurt to make it

```
In case of an ``sstore``, if all outgoing code paths revert (due to an explicit ``revert(...)`` or ``invalid()`` or due to infinite recursion) or lead to another ``sstore`` for which the optimizer
```

As for checking the other optimizer steps: we actually *should* do that :-). In ``DeadCodeEliminator`` the recursion case is, for example, also missing (and there ``revert`` is used in a list of statements, so clearly refers to the builtin call only)...

Reviewer: On the other hand I also think the ``DeadCodeEliminator`` is also the *only* case that needs adjustment, so it's not too bad.

can tell that it will overwrite the first store, the statement will be removed. For example, the following code

.. code-block:: yul

    {
        let c := calldataload(0)
        sstore(c, 1)
        if c {
            sstore(c, 2)
        }
        sstore(c, 3)

>     }

Reviewer 2: How about adding another `sstore` that is not redundant?

Author: Another `sstore` that writes to `c`, or to a different variable?

Author: On the other hand, I think the examples should be as simple (minimal) as possible, so not sure what adding another non-redundant `sstore` brings, since the last `sstore(c, 3)` is already not redundant and is hence not removed after the step?

> will produce the code below after the unused store eliminator step is run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will be transformed into the code below after the Unused Store Eliminator step is run
```

.. code-block:: yul

    {
        {
            let c := calldataload(0)
            let _2 := 1
            if c { let _3 := 2 }
            sstore(c, 3)
        }

>     }

Reviewer 2: I don't think the step actually add the extra block. I looks like the effect of some of the initial required steps. Same with the extra assignment. When I run just this step in `yulopti` I get this:
```yul
{
    let c := calldataload(0)
    if c { }
    sstore(c, 3)
}
```

Author: I've copied this from `if_overwrite_all_branches.yul` test. I would assume that one only uses the `USE` step; does the same go for your `yulopti` run?

Reviewer 2: That test probably runs multiple steps. `yulopti` lets you run steps one by one, interactively. It's a simple utility you can use in your local build. Check out [`yulopti.cpp`](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/test/tools/yulopti.cpp).

Author: Yup, you're right. Thanks for pointing out `yulopti`.

For ``mstore``, things are generally simpler, at least in the outermost yul block as all ``mstore``

> statements will be removed if they are never read from in all code paths. At function analysis level however,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
statements will be removed if they are never read from in any code path. At function analysis level however,
```

> statements will be removed if they are never read from in all code paths. At function analysis level however,

Reviewer 2: It's best to break lines at the end of the sentence. RST will join lines anyway and this way you do not have to rewrap the whole paragraph when you modify just one sentence. Diffs are also cleaner:
```suggestion
statements will be removed if they are never read from in all code paths.
At function analysis level however, the approach is similar to ``sstore``, as we don't know
```

Author: > It's best to break lines at the end of the sentence.
Sure, I'll re-work it, but I'm assuming this doesn't apply to longer sentences.

Reviewer 2: For longer sentences I'd just break them in the middle (around 100 chars). The whole sentence is then still a complete unit that can be modified or removed without having to rewrap stuff around it.

``function f(x) -> y { revert(y, y} }`` where the literal ``y`` will be replaced by its value ``0``,
allowing us to rewrite the function.

.. _unused-store-eliminator:

UnusedStoreEliminator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Optimizer component that removes ``sstore`` and memory store statements if conditions are met for said removal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optimizer component that removes redundant ``sstore`` and memory store statements.
```

``if conditions are met`` is rather redundant itself, isn't it? It of course doesn't do it unconditionally for all of them :-).

Reviewer: We could also phrase it more abstractly as something like ``removes statements with side-effects on storage or memory in cases in which it can prove that those side-effects can never be observed``... although I'm not sure about that - might make things worse...

Reviewer: Strictly speaking that'd be more accurate, though... one example of a weird side-effect of memory is that ``msize()`` can change if you remove memory stores, so the step actually also doesn't remove any memory store, if there is any ``msize()`` in the code... maybe we don't need to mention that detail specifically here, but yeah.

Author: I honestly prefer the first suggestion as `redundant` is explicit, and pretty simple to decipher for someone reading the docs, where as `statements with side-effects`, and `side-effects can never be observed` is a little too abstract for my tastes :)

In case of an ``sstore``, if all outgoing code paths revert (due to an explicit ``revert()``, ``invalid()``, or infinite recursion) or

> lead to another ``sstore`` for which the optimizer can tell that it will overwrite the first store, the statement will be removed.

Reviewer: We should probably filll in a bit more detail here. It may be obvious, but between the initial ``sstore`` and the revert or the overwriting ``sstore`` there also cannot be any statement that could possibly read the value back that was initially written.

That includes external calls, user-defined functions with *any* storage access and ``sload``s of a slot that can't be proven to differ from the slot written by the initial ``sstore``.

``function f(x) -> y { revert(y, y} }`` where the literal ``y`` will be replaced by its value ``0``,
allowing us to rewrite the function.

> .. _unused-store-eliminator:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. index:: ! unused store eliminator
.. _unused-store-eliminator:
```

Author: Why though, as I've already put it up top in the `index` section?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, but `!` means it's the main entry for the topic (there can be many index entries for the same keyword).

Also, putting it at the top is not great IMO and I'd remove it. When you go to the index, you want to be taken to the section that's about your keyword, not the beginning of a big page that has that somewhere :)

Author: I'd prefer to do this in a separate PR (we can even open an issue for this), since none of anchors (or indices) in `optimizer.rst` use this approach.

UnusedStoreEliminator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Optimizer component that removes redundant ``sstore`` and memory store statements.
In case of an ``sstore``, if all outgoing code paths revert (due to an explicit ``revert()``, ``invalid()``, or infinite recursion) or
lead to another ``sstore`` for which the optimizer can tell that it will overwrite the first store, the statement will be removed.

> However, if a there is read operation between the initial ``sstore`` and the revert, or the overwriting ``sstore``, the statement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if a there is a read operation between the initial ``sstore`` and the revert, or the overwriting ``sstore``, the statement
```

Author: Can I suggest a change to your change :D 
`However, if a there is a read...`

Reviewer 2: Sure.... but isn't what you wrote identical to the initial part of my suggestion?

Reviewer 2: Ah wait. It is but just noticed that you probably meant that extra `a` I missed xD

> will not be removed.

Reviewer: Spacing:
```suggestion
However, if a there is read operation between the initial ``sstore`` and the revert, or the overwriting ``sstore``, the statement
will not be removed.
```

> Such a read operation includes external calls, user-defined functions with any storage access, and ``sload`` of a slot that can't be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such read operations include: external calls, user-defined functions with any storage access, and ``sload`` of a slot that can't be
```

> Such a read operation includes external calls, user-defined functions with any storage access, and ``sload`` of a slot that can't be

Reviewer 2: The general style in the docs is not to use contractions.
```suggestion
Such a read operation includes external calls, user-defined functions with any storage access, and ``sload`` of a slot that cannot be
```

proven to differ from the slot written by the initial ``sstore``.

For example, the following code

.. code-block:: yul

    {
        let c := calldataload(0)
        sstore(c, 1)
        if c {
            sstore(c, 2)
        }
        sstore(c, 3)
    }

will be transformed into the code below after the Unused Store Eliminator step is run

.. code-block:: yul

    {
        let c := calldataload(0)
        if c { }
        sstore(c, 3)
    }

For memory store operations, things are generally simpler, at least in the outermost yul block as all such
statements will be removed if they are never read from in any code path.

> At function analysis level however, the approach is similar to ``sstore``, as we don't know whether the memory location will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At function analysis level, however, the approach is similar to ``sstore``, as we do not know whether the memory location will
```
